0023 - CQRS command API convention (#35)
PrestaShop/ADR: 0023-cqrs-api-guidelines.md

# 23. CQRS API quidelines

Date: 2023-08-24

## Status
In progress

## Context

> We build API based on commands we need to define a convention for the path format and the ApiPlatform resources classes. We will mostly follow REST conventions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In PrestaShop 9.0, [a new API](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/pull/29931) is being built powered by ApiPlatform, based on Commands (from CQRS). We need to define a convention for the path format and the ApiPlatform resources classes. We will mostly follow REST conventions
```

Author: I'm not sure adding a link to this PR which was only a first POC is enough to define the project as a whole Nor would another PR since they are all small blocks The feature is too big to be summarized with one PR so I'd drop this reference completely

> but we precise a few things to avoid unnecesary debates later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but it's useful to write down clearly a few things to avoid confusion later.
```

## Convention

## URI path and parameters conventions

We base the naming on the domain from CQRS (which usually matches the ObjectModel entity name as well) in `PrestaShop/PrestaShop/Core/Domain`

Example: Hook

Domain: `PrestaShop/PrestaShop/Core/Domain/Hook`
ApiPlatform resource class: `PrestaShopBundle\ApiPlatform\Resources\Hook`

> URI conventions, we use the domain word as a base for the URI, for single entity APIs we use the singular form, for list (or when we return a collection) we use the plural.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for URI conventions, we use the domain word as a base for the URI, for single entity APIs we use the singular form, for list (or when we return a collection) we use the plural.
```

For the identifier related to one entity we use the domain name suffixed by `Id` (ex: Hook -> `hookId`).

List: `ApiPlatform\Metadata\GetCollection` `/hooks`
One hook endpoint: `ApiPlatform\Metadata\Get` `/hook/{hookId}`

For APIs that are sub part of a larger entity (wether it's to display its related entities or small parts of a big entity) we keep the initial domain name as the beginning
of the URI and append it with the definition of the sub parts (separated by a `/`). If it's the sub part of an identified entity, we complete the initial URI path and append
the sub part after the entity ID. When the sub part is an action name or a compund name we use camel case convention.

Example:
Hook status (sub part): `/hook/{hookId}/status`
Search (action) products:  `/products/search`
Product combinations (sub part): `/product/{productId}/combinations`
Assign product to category (action): `/product/{productId}/assignToCategory`
Set product carriers (set a sub part): `/product/{productId}/carriers`
Attribute group (list):  `/attributeGroups`
Attribute group associated values (list of sub part):  `/attributeGroup/{attributeGroupId}/attributes`

### HTTP methods

> Read operations use GET method

Reviewer: Use `<br/>` to add a break line. If you don't do that, GitHub will interpret the markdown and append lines against each other. Some the following Markdown
```
A
B
C
D
```
will be formatted this way by GitHub:
```ABCD```

Creation operations use POST method (without ID specified)

> Update operations use PUT method (ex: PUT `/product/{productId}`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update operations use PUT method (ex: PUT `/product/{productId}`)
```
I suggest to clarify: partial or complete updates. Some API use PATCH for partial updates and PUT for full updates.

Delete operations use DELETE method (ex: DELETE `/product/{productId}`)

### Bulk operations

Similar convention for list of IDs we use the domain and append `Ids` at the end.

Bulk delete products: Method DELETE `/products` with `productIds` parameter in request body (array of product IDs)
Bulk duplicate products: Method POST `/products/duplicate` with `productIds` parameter in request body (array of product IDs)
Bulk update status: Method PUT `/products/updateStatus` with `productIds` parameter in request body (array of product IDs)

### CQRS Mapping

> We develop provider/processor helpers to automatically transform API posted data into CQRS queries/commands but to use it you need to follow a convention, the parameters in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Providers/processors](https://api-platform.com/docs/core/state-processors/) are implemented as helpers to automatically transform submitted data through the API into CQRS queries/commands but it needs to match a convention, the parameters in the
```

API request must match the fields from the CQRS command (contructor parameters and/or setters method). The only exception is for the entity ID which must always have the naming
`entityId` if the related command/query parameter doesn't match we'll handle a custom mapping but the URI format should respect the convention.

Example:
Command: `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Domain\Customer\Group\Command\AddCustomerGroupCommand`
Command fields:
- `localizedNames: string[]`
- `reductionPercent: DecimalNumber`
- `displayPriceTaxExcluded: bool`
- `showPrice: bool`
- `$shopIds: ShopId[]`
POST parameters:
- `localizedNames: string[]`
- `reductionPercent: float`
- `displayPriceTaxExcluded: bool`
- `showPrice: bool`
- `shopIds: int[]`

> ### Scope names

Reviewer: I suggest to provide a link to ApiPlatform doc about scopes

Author: There's none, APIPlatform is simply based on Symfony security rules and roles
We added a feature to handle a list of scopes that are interpreted as roles internally

> This convention is only for the Core Api, if modules wish to define their own API they are free to use any convention for the scopes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This convention is only for the Core API, if modules wish to define their own API they are free to use any convention for the scopes.
```
